Transcriptional reprogramming from innate immune functions to a pro-thrombotic signature by monocytes in COVID-19
Abstract
Although alterations in myeloid cells have been observed in COVID-19, the specific underlying mechanisms are not completely understood. Here, we examine the function of classical CD14+ monocytes in patients with mild and moderate COVID-19 during the acute phase of infection and in healthy individuals. Monocytes from COVID-19 patients display altered expression of cell surface receptors and a dysfunctional metabolic profile that distinguish them from healthy monocytes. Secondary pathogen sensing ex vivo leads to defects in pro-inflammatory cytokine and type-I IFN production in moderate COVID-19 cases, together with defects in glycolysis. COVID-19 monocytes switch their gene expression profile from canonical innate immune to pro-thrombotic signatures and are functionally pro-thrombotic, both at baseline and following ex vivo stimulation with SARS-CoV-2. Transcriptionally, COVID-19 monocytes are characterized by enrichment of pathways involved in hemostasis, immunothrombosis, platelet aggregation and other accessory pathways to platelet activation and clot formation. These results identify a potential mechanism by which monocyte dysfunction may contribute to COVID-19 pathology.
Introduction
COVID-19 is a respiratory tract infection caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Although the majority of infections in unvaccinated individuals are mild or asymptomatic, 15% of patients develop moderate to severe disease requiring hospitalisation, and 5% develop critical disease with life-threatening pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome and septic shock.
During the acute phase of infection, myeloid cells, including monocytes and macrophages, are the predominant immune cell type in the lungs of COVID-19 patients and play a major role in the pathogenicity of the disease. However, contrasting observations have been reported regarding the involvement of myeloid cells in the development of cytokine storms vs. immunosuppression and the overactive or deficient type I IFN response generated by myeloid cells in the lungs and in peripheral blood. Despite these inconsistent reports, most studies have observed dysregulated innate immune responses and reduced expression of human leukocyte antigen DR (HLA-DR) by circulating myeloid cells, which is considered a marker of immune suppression.
Monocytes are blood-circulating, phagocytic, innate immune leukocytes with important functions in pathogen sensing, and innate and adaptive immune response activation during viral infection. Despite their heterogeneity, human monocytes are broadly classified into three subsets based on the expression of CD14 and CD16: classical (CD14+CD16-), intermediate (CD14+CD16+), and nonclassical (CD14lowCD16+) monocytes. During viral infection, circulating monocytes infiltrate affected tissues and differentiate into inflammatory macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs), contributing to pathogen clearance and tissue regeneration.
Here, we examine the phenotype and functionality of the main monocyte population in humans, i.e., classical CD14+ monocytes, in patients with COVID-19 during the acute phase of disease and compare them to those of healthy individuals. We find that ex vivo isolated CD14+ monocytes from mild and moderate COVID-19 patients are phenotypically different from monocytes from healthy individuals, displaying differential expression of costimulatory and inhibitory receptors, MHC molecules and a dysfunctional metabolic profile that is accompanied by decreased ex vivo NF-κB activation, while maintaining an intact type I IFN antiviral response.
Subsequent pathogen sensing ex vivo led to a state of functional unresponsiveness of COVID-19 monocytes that was associated transcriptionally with that of an endotoxin-induced tolerance signature, characterized by the decrease in canonical innate immune functions, including the expression of activation markers and pro-inflammatory cytokine production. In addition, their gene expression signature and function switched from canonical innate immune functions to a pro-thrombotic phenotype characterized by increased expression of pathways involved in immunothrombosis and increased capacity to form cell aggregates with platelets. These results provide a potential mechanism by which innate immune dysfunction in COVID-19 contributes to disease progression.
Results
Phenotypic alterations in COVID-19 monocytes
Global alterations in innate immune cell phenotypes have been identified in severe COVID-19. As the main human monocyte population, we focused on deeply characterizing the ex vivo phenotype of classical CD14+ monocytes in uninfected healthy individuals and patients with COVID-19 presenting with mild or moderate symptoms (1-2 or 3-4 WHO ordinal scale for COVID-19 severity, respectively) during the acute phase of disease. The battery of markers examined by high dimensional flow cytometry included MHC molecules and costimulatory and coinhibitory receptors.
Dimensionality reduction tools demonstrated that while some overlap in the global phenotypes was observed among the three study groups, monocytes from healthy individuals were clearly distinct from both mild and moderate COVID-19 on a tSNE plot (n = 15 individuals per group). In addition, COVID-19 monocytes could be distinguished based on disease severity, with main cell clusters for both disease severity groups mapping separately on the tSNE plots.
Moderate COVID-19 monocytes expressed decreased levels of HLA-DR, in agreement with previous reports, but in contrast, they displayed increased expression of HLA-ABC compared to both mild disease and uninfected individuals, suggesting a skewed trend towards class I antigen presentation. In addition, moderate COVID-19 monocytes expressed increased levels of the c-type lectin CD301.
The decreased expression of the costimulatory receptor CD86 on moderate COVID-19 monocytes compared to healthy and mild COVID-19 patients, the increased expression of the inhibitory receptors TIM3 compared to healthy individuals, and PD1 compared to mild COVID-19 monocytes suggest an altered activation profile skewed towards an inhibitory phenotype. In addition, significant differences in the expression of certain markers were found between mild and moderate COVID-19 monocytes.
Metabolic dysfunction in COVID-19 monocytes
The fundamental differences in the phenotype of moderate COVID-19 monocytes compared to that of healthy individuals led us to investigate in depth the gene expression profile of ex vivo isolated classical CD14+ monocytes from patients with moderate COVID-19 and compare them with those of healthy individuals. Principal component analysis (PCA) applied to examine the global distribution of gene expression profiles from COVID-19 monocytes (n = 10) and healthy individuals (n = 6) demonstrated a clear separation between groups along PC1, with genes encoding a number of soluble factors, chemokines and HLA class II molecules as the main genes contributing to the separation between healthy and COVID-19 monocytes.
Differential gene expression analysis yielded 422 upregulated and 187 downregulated genes (≥1.5-fold change, FDR < 0.05) in COVID-19 monocytes compared to healthy controls. We used these genes to perform a pathway enrichment analysis with XGR and pathway annotations from Reactome to gain insight on potential pathways differentially expressed in COVID-19 monocytes. Interestingly, pathway enrichment identified glycolysis as the most enriched pathway in COVID-19 monocytes, and also included metabolism of lipids and lipoproteins among the statistically significant pathways.
Other significantly enriched pathways included interferon signaling and cytokine signaling, results that are in agreement with previous reports on the role of these two pathways in COVID-19 pathogenesis. We subsequently examined the directionality of expression of the enriched pathways by analyzing downregulated genes and upregulated genes separately.
Pathway enrichment analysis of genes significantly upregulated (≥1.5-fold change, FDR < 0.05) in COVID-19 compared to healthy individuals demonstrated a significant increase in the metabolism of a number of lipids, including sphingolipids, phospholipids, and lipoproteins. Other upregulated pathways in COVID-19 monocytes included interferon signaling, cytokine signaling, and transmembrane transport of small molecules.
The increased type I IFN gene signature in COVID-19 monocytes was confirmed by the increased ex vivo phospho-IRF3 protein expression in moderate COVID-19 patients compared to healthy individuals and by the increased expression of IFITM2 as an IFN-stimulated gene, measured by real-time PCR in an expanded cohort of mild and moderate COVID-19 patients.
NFκB activation was examined ex vivo indirectly by IκBα expression and directly by phosphorylation of the p65 NFκB subunit, as a readout for cytokine signaling. While monocytes from mild COVID-19 patients displayed a decrease in the expression of IκBα compared to that of healthy individuals, monocytes from moderate COVID-19 patients did not. Furthermore, neither mild nor moderate COVID-19 monocytes displayed an increased expression of phospho-p65 NFκB. This observation suggests that other additional mechanisms may be regulating the activation of NFκB, and that NFκB-driven cytokine responses may be altered in patients with COVID-19.
The only pathway that was significantly downregulated in COVID-19 monocytes was glycolysis, with decreased expression of a number of enzymes involved in glucose degradation, including PFKP, ENO1, PFKB4 and others. This metabolic profile with increased metabolism of lipids and decreased glycolysis was unexpected, as glycolysis is an important driver of innate immune cell function during the recognition of pathogens.
To confirm these gene expression data, we used SCENITH to metabolically profile CD14+ monocytes from COVID-19 patients and healthy controls ex vivo. SCENITH uses protein synthesis as a measurement of global metabolic activity. Puromycin incorporation is used as a reliable readout of protein synthesis levels (and therefore metabolic activity) in vitro and in vivo. In agreement with the pathway enrichment results, ex vivo puromycin incorporation was significantly decreased in moderate COVID-19 monocytes compared to healthy individuals, suggesting decreased metabolic activity.
Moreover, the glycolytic capacity of COVID-19 monocytes was significantly decreased in moderate patients and correlated with disease severity, and this was accompanied by a concomitant increase in mitochondrial dependency in monocytes from moderate COVID-19 patients. The decreased metabolic activity and glycolytic capacity were further confirmed by Seahorse analysis of extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) and oxygen consumption rate (OCR) as readouts for glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation, respectively.
These data suggest that monocytes from COVID-19 patients with moderate disease display a distinct gene expression signature, characterized by an impaired metabolic profile that is accompanied by decreased NFκB activation, and maintenance of an intact type I IFN antiviral response.
COVID-19 monocytes display impaired pathogen sensing ex vivo
The dysfunctional metabolic profile with a downregulation of glycolysis and the defective activation of NFκB, both pathways heavily involved in the activation of canonical innate immune cell functions upon virus encounter, led us to examine the functional capacity of monocytes to sense and respond to SARS-CoV-2 ex vivo.
Upon UV-inactivated SARS-CoV-2 stimulation (106 viral particles per 106 cells for 20 h), CD14+ monocytes from healthy individuals displayed a significant increase in both TNF and IL-10 production. However, COVID-19 monocytes significantly produced less TNF as compared to healthy monocytes, while no differences were observed in IL-10 expression. The defect in TNF production upon stimulation was not SARS-CoV-2-specific, as stimulation with inactivated common cold coronaviruses (106 viral particles per 106 cells for 20 h) or bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 100 ng/ml for 20 h) also led to significantly reduced TNF production compared to monocytes from healthy individuals.
In addition, the expression of CD40, which is important for monocyte effector function and is upregulated after virus sensing, was increased in monocytes from healthy individuals but not in COVID-19 monocytes. This decreased expression was confirmed after stimulation with common cold coronaviruses or LPS, suggesting that the activation defects in COVID-19 monocytes in response to pathogen sensing were not specific to SARS-CoV-2.
The apparent unresponsiveness of COVID-19 monocytes to pathogen sensing was accompanied by altered metabolic reprogramming. Innate immune cells that sense pathogens increase the rate of glycolysis over mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation to enable fast energy availability. However, COVID-19 monocyte energetic profile measured by SCENITH did not increase upon LPS stimulation, unlike that of healthy monocytes. Moreover, when stimulated with LPS, moderate COVID-19 monocytes showed a decreased glycolytic capacity and an increase in fatty acid and amino acid oxidation capacity compared to healthy monocytes, that correlated with a slight but significant decrease in glucose dependency and an increase in mitochondrial dependency compared to monocytes from healthy individuals.
Pro-thrombotic gene expression signature of COVID-19 monocytes
To globally characterize the gene expression signature of activated monocytes in COVID-19, we performed RNA-seq of isolated monocytes from healthy individuals and patients with moderate COVID-19 stimulated for 20 h with UV-inactivated SARS-CoV-2. PCA clearly separated COVID-19 from healthy monocytes, although some healthy monocytes clustered with COVID-19 in the principal component space.
Quantification of differentially expressed genes yielded 1,437 upregulated and 2,073 downregulated genes in activated COVID-19 compared to activated healthy monocytes (≥1.5 fold change, FDR < 0.05). Pathway enrichment of differentially expressed genes using XGR software and the Reactome pathway database demonstrated a number of expected pathways involved in the innate immune response to pathogens, including type I IFN signaling, cytokine signaling, interactions between lymphoid and non-lymphoid cells, NLR sensing, etc.
However, when we focused our analysis on pathways enriched in upregulated genes in activated COVID-19 monocytes compared to activated healthy monocytes, the most significantly enriched pathways were involved in or closely related to hemostasis and coagulation, including integrin signaling, extracellular matrix organization, signaling by PDGF, interactions with activated platelets and general hemostasis.
Integrin receptors are used by cells to interact with other cells and with the extracellular matrix, by binding numerous matrix proteins including collagen, actin and laminin, being also involved in hemostasis and platelet aggregation. In addition, monocytes actively bind to platelets forming pro-thrombotic aggregates in inflammatory and vascular pathologies. Monocytes from COVID-19 patients expressed increased levels of various collagen subunits (COL1A1, PLOD2, COL6A3, COL6A1), enzymes involved in collagen triple helix synthesis (COLGALT1) and a number of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP1, MMP2, MMP14), which are not only involved in extracellular matrix remodeling, but they have also been implicated in contributing directly to platelet activation and priming for aggregation.
These results are in agreement with the clinical observations of hypercoagulability and acquired coagulopathies in patients with COVID-19, and suggest that monocytes from moderate COVID-19 patients upregulate a pro-thrombotic gene expression signature upon secondary SARS-CoV-2 sensing.
Interestingly, downregulated pathways in stimulated COVID-19 monocytes compared to stimulated healthy donor monocytes included most of the canonical immunological functions expected for innate immune cells upon virus sensing, i.e., interferon signaling, RIG-I/MDA5-mediated induction of interferons, activation of TCR signaling in T cells, innate immune functions and interactions with nonlymphoid cells. The majority of the top 40 genes significantly downregulated in COVID-19 monocytes from these downregulated pathways consisted of different interferons (IFNA1, IFNA2, IFNA14, and IFNB1), interferon-stimulated genes (IFIT3, ISG15, IFIT2, ISG20, IRF7, and MX2) and pathogen-sensing receptors (TLR7, AIM2).
This gene signature was functionally confirmed by examining the activation pattern of IRF3 in response to LPS in monocytes from healthy individuals and patients with mild and moderate COVID-19. While healthy and mild COVID-19 monocytes significantly increased the expression of the phosphorylated form of IRF3 upon LPS stimulation compared to baseline levels, monocytes from moderate patients did not. This inability to activate IRF3 correlated with decreased expression of the interferon-stimulated gene IFITM2, examined in an expanded cohort of healthy, mild and moderate COVID-19 monocytes after stimulation with SARS-CoV-2.
These findings in COVID-19 monocytes are consistent with an unexpected switch from canonical innate immune functions to a pro-thrombotic phenotype and potential cross-talk with other cells involved in hemostasis, which suggests that activated monocytes may contribute to COVID-19 severity by actively impacting hemostasis and by a reduction in innate immune functions necessary for efficient virus clearance.
Monocytes from COVID-19 patients are functionally pro-thrombotic
In order to functionally confirm the pro-thrombotic gene expression signature of monocytes from COVID-19 we performed in vitro assays to test the capacity of monocytes to form monocyte-platelet aggregates (MPA), which are an important initiation factor in the generation of thrombi.
Isolated monocytes from healthy individuals and patients with mild or moderate COVID-19, either unstimulated or stimulated with UV-inactivated SARS-CoV-2 ex vivo, were co-cultured with freshly isolated platelets from a healthy individual to rule out the possibility that differential activation of platelets from healthy individuals and COVID-19 patients would lead to confounding results on the pro-thrombotic capacity of the monocytes.
After 20 h of monocyte-platelet co-culture, we measured the generation of MPA by determining the expression of CD41 in monocytes, which is a standard method to identify MPA (CD41 is a marker of megakaryocytes and it is not expressed on monocytes). Monocytes from patients with moderate COVID-19 aggregated significantly more platelets that those of healthy individuals or patients with mild disease, functionally supporting the pro-thrombotic signature obtained in the RNA-seq analysis.
Interestingly, the increase in MPA formation was observed after ex vivo stimulation with UV-inactivated SARS-CoV-2 but also in ex vivo unstimulated monocytes, which was initially surprising due to the lack of hemostasis-related pathways being significantly enriched in the ex vivo RNA-seq datasets. However, upon examination of the RNA-seq analysis from ex vivo unstimulated monocytes, we identified a number of significantly upregulated genes in COVID-19 monocytes compared to healthy individuals that belonged to pathways that included "Hemostasis" and "Platelet activation, signaling and aggregation".
We subsequently took advantage of the available clinical data of the patients for which RNA-seq analysis of monocytes was performed. For these patients we had information of the plasma concentration of D-dimer at the time of blood collection. D-dimer is routinely used in the clinic as a biomarker for activation of the coagulation and fibrinolysis systems and it has been extensively investigated for the diagnosis, monitoring and treatment of venous thromboembolic diseases, for which it is used routinely. Plasma D-dimer concentration positively correlates with venous thromboembolic diseases in the general population and in patients with COVID-19.
We decided to group samples into high and low plasma D-dimer concentration as a readout of potential thrombotic issues. While most patients whose monocytes were used for RNA-seq had elevated D-dimer concentrations at the time of blood collection (>500 ng/ml), we could clearly identify two groups of patients: those with D-dimer concentration >1600 ng/ml (High D-dimer) and those with D-dimer concentration <1000 ng/ml (Low D-dimer).
Using the RNA-seq datasets from ex vivo isolated monocytes, we examined the expression of those genes that were significantly enriched in two pathways: "Hemostasis" and "Platelet activation, signaling and aggregation". In agreement with the increased capacity to form MPAs, we observed an increased expression of genes associated with these pathways in a D-dimer concentration-dependent manner. Moreover, while not all genes were significantly upregulated in the high D-dimer group, 10 out of 12 showed a trend toward an increased gene expression as D-dimer concentration increased. This observation was specific for these two hemostasis-related pathways.
We also examined the expression of those genes enriched in pathways potentially related to a pro-thrombotic signature in RNA-samples from COVID-19 monocytes stimulated with UV-inactivated SARS-CoV-2, again dividing the samples into low and high D-dimer concentrations in plasma. The pathways tested were "Integrin cell surface interactions", "Extracellular matrix organization", "Response to elevated platelet cytosolic Ca2+", "Signaling by PDGF", "Hemostasis" and "Platelet aggregation (plug formation)".
Interestingly, while all the genes were significantly upregulated in COVID-19 patients as compared to healthy controls, no differences in their expression were found between the two groups of patients with low and high plasma D-dimer concentration. This observation suggests that secondary SARS-CoV-2 sensing may switch monocyte phenotype and functionality in a D-dimer concentration-independent manner.
Endotoxin tolerance signature enriched in COVID-19 monocytes
A number of works have suggested similarities between the characteristics of the immune response in COVID-19 patients and those of septic individuals, including multiple organ dysfunction, immunosuppression, coagulopathies and acute respiratory failure. To determine the similarities between the transcriptional signature of COVID-19 monocytes with that of sepsis monocytes, we utilized publicly available microarray gene expression data on sepsis monocytes and healthy controls and we tested the estimated fold changes for correlation with those from our ex vivo and activated COVID-19 and healthy monocytes.
The sepsis dataset compared 6 age-matched healthy individuals to 8 adult Gram-negative urinary sepsis patients, with samples taken within 4 h of hospital admission. No clear correlation was observed in any of the two contrasts, which suggests that the transcriptional signature of CD14+ monocytes in moderate COVID-19 is not similar to that of monocytes in sepsis.
The lack of cytokine expression, activation of costimulatory receptors, impaired antigen presentation potential and metabolic impairments displayed by moderate COVID-19 monocytes resembled the phenotype observed in LPS-induced tolerance. We have previously defined an endotoxin tolerance gene expression signature from publicly available microarray data on monocytes stimulated in vitro with LPS that comprises 398 genes. Out of these, 318 genes were detected in our RNA-seq dataset.
We tested for correlation of the endotoxin tolerance signature with ex vivo and activated COVID-19 monocytes, and while ex vivo COVID-19 monocytes did not display a clear correlation with the tolerance signature, activated COVID-19 monocytes displayed similar directionality of expression in those genes from the tolerance signature that were detected in the dataset. These data were further confirmed in barcode plots, showing a statistically significant enrichment of the endotoxin tolerance gene signature in the list of differentially expressed genes from stimulated COVID-19 monocytes compared to healthy controls, for both upregulated and downregulated genes.
These data are in agreement with the observed diminished response of COVID-19 monocytes to secondary LPS stimulation in both total PBMC and isolated CD14+ monocytes.
Discussion
Here we employed metabolic, transcriptomic and functional assays to identify a number of phenotypic and functional alterations in COVID-19 monocytes that characterize moderate disease and we have provided the functional characteristics of monocyte responses in mild SARS-CoV-2 infections as an example of an efficiently and successfully cleared infection without excessive immunopathology.
Important alterations in metabolism and transcriptional signatures characterize moderate COVID-19 monocytes and are important aspects of a global unresponsiveness phenotype upon pathogen sensing characterized by a transcriptional switch from canonical innate immune functions to a pro-thrombotic signature. This pro-thrombotic phenotype was further confirmed functionally, and is in agreement with clinical observations that patients with moderate and severe COVID-19 are at higher risk of developing hemostasis issues.
The initial inflammatory response mounted upon SARS-CoV-2 infection could potentially drive the changes in monocyte functionality, as inflammation is well known to activate the coagulation system. Moreover, while our results are focused on the functionality of monocytes, previous data have shown that platelets from patients with COVID-19 are activated ex vivo during the acute phase of disease and have increased capacity to form monocyte-platelet aggregates, which supports the notion of inflammation driving the initial activation and functional switch of these cell types, promoting the initiation of hemostasis issues and potentially the diminished innate immune functions upon secondary stimulation.
In addition, the metabolic defects observed in COVID-19 monocytes probably underlie the observed diminished response to secondary stimulation, as they modulate innate immune functions including cytokine expression, activation, phagocytic capacity, etc. More mechanistic studies are needed to understand the link between coagulation and hyporesponsiveness to secondary monocyte stimulation in COVID-19 patients.
A question that remains to be answered is the driver(s) of the described circulating monocyte dysfunction. Ex vivo isolated monocytes from moderate COVID-19 patients are pro-thrombotic while maintaining some innate immune functions. However, secondary pathogen sensing ex vivo triggers a switch in COVID-19 monocyte gene expression signature and functionality from canonical innate immune functions to pro-thrombotic phenotype. It remains to be determined whether any soluble factors in the microenvironment contribute to this reprogramming, or even the direct infection of monocytes by SARS-CoV-2, which has been previously suggested.
The phenotype we observe in circulating monocytes is in clear contrast with the functionality of monocyte-derived macrophages in the lung of COVID-19 patients. In this regard, our study is limited by the lack of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) paired samples to compare the phenotype and function of circulating monocytes with those infiltrating the target tissue.
However, some previous publications examining paired airway and blood samples have shown differences in the signatures of circulating and lung innate immune cells, with low HLA-DR expressing, dysfunctional monocytes in the blood, and hyperactive airway monocyte and macrophages producing pro-inflammatory cytokines. The underlying mechanisms for these differences remain elusive.
During the course of viral infections, circulating monocytes rapidly leave the bloodstream and migrate to target tissues, where, after pathogen sensing and/or other microenvironmental stimuli, they differentiate into macrophages and/or dendritic cells. In this study, we examined the functionality of monocytes during the acute phase of disease, early after symptom onset. It remains to be determined whether these dysfunctional monocytes have the capacity to migrate to the lungs and contribute to lung inflammation, or whether their dysfunction is such that migration is impaired and monocyte migration only occurred during the very initial phases of infection before monocyte acquired the impairments observed in this study.
Of note, some of the defective pathways displayed by COVID-19 monocytes, as for example glycolysis, have been shown to be essential for migration of other cells to target tissue. Finally, the results described in this study beg the question of whether the functional impairments observed in monocytes during the acute phase of infection are COVID-19-specific. While stimulation with other viruses and bacterial products led to similar altered immune phenotypes in COVID-19 monocytes, it seems likely that these processes occur with other moderate respiratory viral infections, as has been shown in seasonal Influenza vaccination.
Longitudinal studies of monocyte dynamics during SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory viral infections using both blood and BALF samples are warranted to answer these questions.